                                                                                 Q3-1
Theory



                                                                                             English (Official)

Water and Objects (10 pt)
In this problem, we consider the phenomena caused by the interaction between water and objects, re-
lated to surface tension. Part A treats motion, while Parts B and C are regarding static situations.
If necessary, you can use the fact that if the function 𝑦(𝑥) satisfies
                                                                  √    the differential
                                                                             √          equation 𝑦″ (𝑥) = 𝑎𝑦(𝑥)
(𝑎 is a positive constant), then its general solution is 𝑦(𝑥) = 𝐴𝑒 𝑎𝑥 + 𝐵𝑒− 𝑎𝑥 , where 𝐴 and 𝐵 are arbitrary
constants.

Part A. Merger of water drops (2.0 points)
As shown in Fig.1, we consider two stationary, spherical water drops on the surface of a super-
hydrophobic material, i.e., very strong repulsive force exists between material and water.
Initially neighboring two identical spherical water drops are placed on the surface; then these two drops
are merged after touching each other and form a larger spherical water drop, which suddenly jumps up.

     A.1     The radius 𝑎 of both water drops before the merger is 100 𝜇m. The density of            2.0pt
             water 𝜌 is 1.00 × 103 kg/m3 . The surface tension 𝛾 is 7.27 × 10−2 J/m2 .
             A portion 𝑘 of the difference of the surface energy before and after the merger,
             ΔE, is transformed into the kinetic energy of the jumped water drop. Then, de-
             termine the initial jump-up velocity, 𝑣, of the merged water drop in two signifi-
             cant digits under the following assumptions:
                 • 𝑘 = 0.06
                 • Before and after merger, the total volume of water is conserved.




                 Fig. 1: Merger of two water drops and jump of the merged water drop.



Part B. A vertically placed board (4.5 points)
A flat board is immersed vertically in water. Figures 2(a) and 2(b) respectively show water surface forms
for the hydrophilic (attractive) and hydrophobic board materials. We neglect the thickness of the board.
The board surface is on the 𝑦𝑧 plane, and the horizontal water surface far away from the board is on
the 𝑥𝑦 plane with 𝑧 = 0. The surface shape does not depend on the 𝑦-coordinate. Let 𝜃(𝑥) be the angle
between the water surface and the horizontal plane at a point (𝑥, 𝑧) on the water surface in the 𝑥𝑧 plane.
Here 𝜃(𝑥) is measured with respect to the positive 𝑥 axis and the counterclockwise rotation is taken as
positive. Let 𝜃(𝑥) be 𝜃0 at the point of contact between the board and the water surface (𝑥 = 0). In the
following, 𝜃0 is fixed by the properties of the board material.
Water density 𝜌 is constant and water surface tension 𝛾 is uniform. The gravitational acceleration con-
stant is given by 𝑔. The atmospheric pressure, 𝑃0 , is assumed to be always uniform. Let us determine
the water surface form in the following steps. Note that the unit of surface tension is J/m2 as well as N/m.
                                                                            Q3-2
Theory



                                                                                       English (Official)




  Fig. 2: Boards vertically immersed in the water. (a) hydrophilic board case;
  (b) hydrophobic board case.


  B.1    We consider a hydrophilic board case, as shown in Fig.2(a). We note that the          0.6pt
         water pressure, 𝑃 , satisfies the conditions 𝑃 < 𝑃0 for 𝑧 > 0 and 𝑃 = 𝑃0 for
         𝑧 = 0. Then, express 𝑃 at 𝑧 in terms of 𝜌, 𝑔, 𝑧, and 𝑃0 .


  B.2    We consider a water block whose cutout is shown as shaded in Fig.3(a). Its 𝑥𝑧         0.8pt
         plane cross-section is shown in a hatched area in Fig.3(b). Let 𝑧1 and 𝑧2 respec-
         tively be the left and right edge coordinates of the boundary (water surface)
         between the water block and the air.
         Obtain a horizontal component (𝑥 component) of the net force per unit length
         along the 𝑦-axis, 𝑓𝑥 , which is exerted on the water block due to the pressure, in
         terms of 𝜌, 𝑔, 𝑧1 , and 𝑧2 . Note that 𝑃0 results in no net horizontal force on the
         water block.
                                                                                Q3-3
Theory



                                                                                            English (Official)




     Fig. 3: Cutout form of water block on the water surface. (a) Bird's eye view and (b) cross-
     sectional view.


    B.3     Surface tension acting on the water block is balanced with the force 𝑓𝑥 discussed       0.8pt
            in B.2. We respectively define 𝜃1 and 𝜃2 as the angles between the water surface
            and the horizontal plane at the left and right edges. Express 𝑓𝑥 in terms of 𝛾,
            𝜃1 , and 𝜃2 .


    B.4     The following equation holds at an arbitrary point (𝑥, 𝑧) on the water surface,         0.8pt
                                     1 𝑧 𝑎
                                       ( ) + cos 𝜃(𝑥) = constant.                      (1)
                                     2 ℓ
            Determine the exponent 𝑎 and express the constant ℓ in terms of 𝛾 and 𝜌. Note
            that this equation holds regardless of hydrophilic or hydrophobic board mate-
            rials.


    B.5     In Eq. (1) in B.4, we assume that variation of the water surface is slow, i.e.,         1.5pt
            |𝑧′ (𝑥)| ≪ 1, so that we can expand cos 𝜃(𝑥) with respect to 𝑧 ′ (𝑥) up to the second
            order. Then, differentiating the resultant equation with respect to 𝑥, we obtain
            the differential equation satisfied by 𝑧(𝑥). Solve this differential equation and
            determine 𝑧(𝑥) for 𝑥 ≥ 0 in terms of tan 𝜃0 and ℓ. Note that the vertical directions
            of Figs. 2 and 3 are exaggerated for better view and they do not satisfy the
            condition, |𝑧 ′ (𝑥)| ≪ 1.


Part C. Interaction between two rods (3.5 points)
The identical rods A and B made of the same material floating in parallel on the water surface are placed
at the same distance away from the 𝑦-axis (Fig.4).
                                                                              Q3-4
Theory



                                                                                          English (Official)




                      Fig. 4: Two rods A and B floating on the water surface.


  C.1    At the contact points of the rod B and the water surface, we define the 𝑧-               1.0pt
         coordinates 𝑧a and 𝑧b , and the angles 𝜃a and 𝜃b , as shown in Fig.5. Determine
         the horizontal force component, 𝐹𝑥 , on the rod B per unit length along the 𝑦-axis
         in terms of 𝜃a , 𝜃b , 𝑧a , 𝑧b , 𝜌, 𝑔, and 𝛾.




         Fig. 5: Vertical cross-sectional view of two rods floating on the water surface.


  C.2    We define the 𝑧-coordinate of the water surface, 𝑧0 , at the midpoint of two rods        1.5pt
         in the 𝑥𝑧 plane. Express the force 𝐹𝑥 obtained in C.1 without using 𝜃a , 𝜃b , 𝑧a , and
         𝑧b .


  C.3    Let 𝑥a be the 𝑥-coordinate of the contact point between the water surface and            1.0pt
         the left side of the rod B. Using the differential equation obtained in B.5, express
         the water level coordinate 𝑧0 of the midpoint of these two rods A and B in terms
         of 𝑥a and 𝑧a . You can use the constant ℓ introduced in B.4.
